Paper: Utilizing SciPy and other open source packages to provide a powerful API for materials manipulation in the Schrödinger Materials Suite (#685)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/alexandr_fonari/alexandr_fonari.rst

:corresponding:

:author: Farshad Fallah
:email: farshad.fallah@schrodinger.com
:institution: Schrödinger Inc., 1540 Broadway, 24th Floor. New York, NY 10036

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utilizing SciPy and other open source packages to provide a powerful API for materials manipulation in the Schrödinger Materials Suite
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

The use of several open source scientific packages in The Schrödinger Materials Suite will be discussed.
A common workflow for materials discovery will be described, discussing how open source packages have been incorporated at every stage.
Some recent implementations of machine learning for materials discovery will be discussed, and how open source packages were leveraged to achieve results faster and more efficiently.

.. class:: keywords

   materials, active learning, OLED, deposition, evaporation

Introduction
------------

> Tools for computational materials discovery can be facilitated by utilizing existing libraries that cover the fundamental mathematics used in the calculations in an optimized fashion.

Reviewer: It would be more helpful for the readers if you could describe what is computational materials discovery and its impact briefly.

Author: Yes, expanded the introduction added couple of figures.

This allows developers to devote more time to developing truly new features instead of re-inventing the wheel, improves the performance of the software, and reduces maintenance.
The Schrödinger Materials Suite [Schr]_ uses a wide variety of scientific packages both in the calculation stage and visualization of results.

A common materials discovery practice is to start with reading an experimental structure of a material, compute its properties of interest (e.g. elastic constants, electrical conductivity), tune the material by modifying its structure (e.g. doping) or adding and removing atoms (deposition, evaporation), and then recompute the properties of the modified material.
This cycle can be run in a high-throughput manner, enumerating different structure modifications in a systematic fashion, such as doping ratio in a semiconductor or depositing different adsorbates.

> Every step of this workflow can benefit from open source code.

Reviewer: Could you list a few open source codes as example?

Author: Sure, added:

There are several of open source packages that allow to generate a large number of structures, run calculation in high throughput manner and analyze the results.
pymatgen allows to generate and analyze periodic structures [pymatgen]_.
It can generate inputs and read outputs of several packages, such as Quantum ESPRESSO (QE), VASP, Gaussian, etc.
To run and manage workflows' jobs in a high-throughput manner, open source packages such as Custodian [pymatgen]_ and AiiDA [aiida]_ can be used.

Materials import and generation
-------------------------------

For reading and writing of material structures, several open source packages (e.g. OpenBabel [Obabel]_, RDKit [Rdkit]_) have implemented functionality for working with several extensively used formats (e.g. CIF, PDB, mol, xyz).
Experimental periodic structures of materials, mainly coming from single crystal X-ray diffraction, are distributed in CIF (Crystallographic Information File), PDB (Protein Data Bank) and lately mmCIF formats [Formats]_. Correctly reading experimental structures is of significant importance, since the rest of the materials discovery workflow depends on it.
In addition to  atom coordinates and periodic cell information, structural data also contains symmetry operations (listed explicitly or by the means of providing a space group) that can be used to decrease the number of computations required for a particular system taking symmetry into account.
This can be important for scaling high-throughput calculations.

>  Both formats allow description of the positional disorder (one example being a solvent molecule not having a stable position within the cell can be described by two or more sets of coordinates).

Reviewer 2: What does "both formats" refer to? CIF and PDB? The previous reference also listed mmCIF, so I am unsure what this means.
```suggestion
Both formats allow description of the positional disorder (for example, a solvent molecule without a stable position within the cell which can be described by multiple sets of coordinates).
```

Reviewer 2: Can you remove the leading spaces in lines like this one? It looks like a few of these were added when the paragraphs were broken up.

Author: - Removed leading spaces in couple of places.
 - Included above suggestion. The sentence is now:

PBD, CIF and mmCIF formats allow description of the positional disorder (for example, a solvent molecule without a stable position within the cell which can be described by multiple sets of coordinates).

Another complication is  that experimental data spans an interval of almost a century, one of the oldest crystal structures deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) [CSD]_, dates to 1924 [Grph]_.

> All these nuances present non-trivial technical challenges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All these nuances present nontrivial technical challenges.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> Thus, it has been a continuous effort by Schrödinger (at least 39 commits went into this project) and others to correctly read and convert periodic structures in OpenBabel.

Reviewer 2: "39 commits": There may be a better way to quantify the effort here. Commit sizes vary wildly from person to person and can be easily distorted by merges / squashes / etc. I would consider measuring this in another way such as hours, lines of code, or number of pull requests. You might even say it two ways, like "39 commits and 2 weeks of work."

Reviewer: Could you use Schrödinger project or Schrödinger library instead?  My first response to see Schrödinger is the Schrödinger who had the cat.   Thanks.

Reviewer 2: Good idea @wdzhou. "Schrödinger, Inc." might be the clearest.

Author: Fixed, sentence is now:

Thus, it has been a continuous effort by Schrödinger, Inc. (at least 39 commits and several weeks of work went into this project) and others to correctly read and convert periodic structures in OpenBabel.

> By version 3.1.1 (the most recent at writing time), this effort resulted in very few (if any) known cases where OpenBabel reads incorrect structure from the experimental data.

Reviewer 2: "very few (if any)": Are there incorrect cases known to you, or not? This statement is supposed to be celebrating a successful effort but I am having trouble determining the extent to which the problem is solved (or not solved). If there is room for the community to engage and improve this code, what is needed?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By version 3.1.1 (the most recent at writing time), this effort resulted in very few (if any) known cases where OpenBabel reads an incorrect structure from the experimental data.
```

Non-periodic molecular formats are simpler since they only contain atom coordinates and no cell or symmetry information.

An important application of structure generation is modeling of substitutional disorder in solid alloys and materials with point defects (intermetallics, semiconductors, oxides and their crystalline surfaces).
In this case the unit cell and atomic sites of the crystal or surface slab are well defined while the chemical species occupying the site may vary.
In order to simulate substitutional disorder one must generate the ensemble of structures that includes all statistically significant atomic distribution in a given unit cell.
 This can be achieved by a brute force enumeration of all symmetrically unique atomic structures with a given number of vacancies, impurities or solute atoms.

> The enumlib library implements algorithms for such a systematic enumeration of periodic structures [Enumlib]_.

Reviewer: Is `enumlib` a specific software library?  If so, it is better to have a reference to it just behind `enumlib library`.  The reference could be a paper about it or its webpage.

Author: Moved the reference. It is referencing:

.. [Enumlib] G. LW Hart, and R. W. Forcade. *Algorithm for generating derivative structures*, Physical Review B 77 (22): 224115 (2008). https://github.com/msg-byu/enumlib/

This allows to generate a big set of symmetrically nonequivalent materials with different compositions (e.g. doping or defect concentration).
Recently, we applied this approach in simultaneous study of the activity and stability of Pt based core-shell type catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction.

> We generated a set of stable doped Pt/transition metal/nitrogen surfaces using periodic enumeration.

Reviewer: Do you have a paper/article to report this study?

Author: Yes, moved existing reference up a bit:

.. [TM] T. Mustard, et al. *Surface reactivity and stability of core-shell solid catalysts from ab initio combinatorial calculations*, ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY. 258. (2019).

Using Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) [QE]_ to perform periodic density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we assessed surface phase diagrams for Pt alloys and  and identified the avenues for stabilizing the cost effective  core-shell systems by a judicious choice of the catalyst core material.

> Such catalysts may prove critical in electrocatalysis for the fuel cell applications [TM]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such catalysts may prove critical in electrocatalysis for fuel cell applications [TM]_.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

Workflow capabilities
---------------------

> In order to be able to run a massively parallel screening of materials a highly scalable and stable queuing system (job scheduler) is required.

Reviewer: `In order to be able to run a massively parallel screening of materials a highly scalable and stable queuing system (job scheduler) is required.`

It is better to add a comma between `materials` and `a`.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

> We have implemented a job queuing system on top of the most used queuing systems (SLURM, torque, etc.) and exposed a Python API to submit and monitor jobs.

Reviewer 2: Seems like TORQUE is supposed to be capitalized ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TORQUE)). Is it worth listing all supported schedulers instead of just saying "etc."? (PBS? LSF?)

Are only HPC / cluster schedulers supported? Are cloud scheduling systems supported? For examples of the kinds of systems I'm thinking about, [Parsl](https://parsl.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) lists its support like this:
> Parsl supports various target resources including clouds (e.g., Amazon Web Services and Google Cloud), clusters (e.g., using Slurm, Torque/PBS, HTCondor, Cobalt), and container orchestration systems (e.g., Kubernetes).

```suggestion
We have implemented a job queuing system on top of the most used queuing systems (SLURM, TORQUE, etc.) and exposed a Python API to submit and monitor jobs.
```

Author: Good point. Updated sentences to:

We have implemented a job queuing system on top of the most used queuing systems (LSF, PBS, SGE, SLURM, TORQUE, UGE) and exposed a Python API to submit and monitor jobs.
Cloud is also supported by means of a virtual cluster configured with SLURM. This allows to submit a large number of jobs, limited only by SLURM scheduling capabilities and cloud resources.

In order to accommodate job dependencies in the workflows, for each job a parent job (or multiple parent jobs) can be defined forming a directed graph of jobs.

> If a job fails (and can not be restarted), all its children (if any) will not start, thus saving queuing and computational time (some examples of workflows are provided below).

Reviewer 2: Rewrite:
```suggestion
If a job fails and cannot be restarted, all its children (if any) will be canceled, thus saving queuing and computational time (some examples of workflows are provided below).
```

Reviewer 2: A job failure means that its children cannot start. Is this always the behavior that users would want on failure? Can random failures or misconfigured software cause the exploration to miss some structures? It may deserve some clarification of what a "failure" means in this context.

Author: Sure, expanded to:

There could be several reasons for a job to fail and there are several restart/recovery mechanisms in place. The lowest level is the restart mechanism (in SLURM it is called *requeue*) by the queuing system itself. This is triggered when a node goes down for some reason. On the cloud, preemptible instances (nodes) can go offline at any moment. On top of that, each individual workflow implements its own way to deal with failures. For example, in case when the simulation is not converging to a requested energy accuracy, it is wasteful to blindly restart the calculation without changing some input parameters. However, in the case of full disk space failure, it is reasonable to try restart with hopes to get a node with more empty disk space. If a job fails (and can not be restarted), all its children (if any) will not start, thus saving queuing and computational time (some examples of workflows are provided below).

This allowed us and our customers to perform massive screenings of materials and their properties.
We reported a massive screening of 250,000 charge-conducting organic materials, totaling approximately 3,619,000 DFT SCF (self-consistent field) single-molecule calculations using quantum mechanics (QM) Jaguar code [Jaguar]_ that took 457,265 CPU hours (~52 years) [CScreen]_.
Another case study is high-throughput molecular dynamics simulations (MD) of thermophysical properties of polymers for various applications [MDS]_.

> There, using Desmond code [Desmond]_ we computed the glass transition temperature (Tg) of 315 polymers and compared the results with experimental measurements [Bicerano]_.

Reviewer 2: There are a few places where articles (the, a, an) are missing in the paper.

Can we write `Tg` in math font, with the `g` in subscript? In LaTeX it would be `$T_g$` but I can't remember how to format that in this document.
```suggestion
There, using the Desmond code [Desmond]_ we computed the glass transition temperature (Tg) of 315 polymers and compared the results with experimental measurements [Bicerano]_.
```

Author: > There are a few places where articles (the, a, an) are missing in the paper.

Will try to catch more of those.

> Can we write Tg in math font, with the g in subscript? In LaTeX it would be $T_g$ but I can't remember how to format that in this document.

Yes, fixed:
```
:math:`T_g`
```

This study took advantage of GPU (graphics processing unit) support as implemented in Desmond, as well as the job scheduler API described above.

For soft materials (polymers, organic small molecules and substrates composed of soft molecules), convex hull and related mathematical methods are important for finding possible accessible solvent voids (during submerging or sorption) and adsorbate sites (during molecular deposition).
These methods are conveniently implemented in SciPy [Scipy]_.
We implemented molecular deposition and evaporation workflows using the Desmond MD engine as the backend.
This workflow enables simulation of the deposition and evaporation of the small molecules on a substrate.

> As an example, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are fabricated using a stepwise process, where layers are deposited on top of previous layers.

Reviewer: I suggest to put a `by` before using, such that

We implemented molecular deposition and evaporation workflows `by` using the Desmond MD.

Author: Fixed.

Both vacuum and solution deposition processes have been used to prepare these films, primarily as "amorphous" thin film active layers lacking long-range order.
Each of these deposition techniques introduces changes to the film structure and consequently, different charge-transfer and luminescent properties [Deposition]_.

Data fitting algorithms and use cases
-------------------------------------

> Whereas for the materials simulations (QM, periodic DFT, classical MD) Python, even with SciPy/NumPy can be slow, SciPy and related packages provide sophisticated numerical function optimization and fitting capabilities, below we list several examples used in the suite.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is awkwardly phrased. I might try rewriting it in multiple sentences and avoid the broad statement that "Python is slow." The speed of the Python interpreter is a topic with a lot of nuance, and there are many valid objections to the claim that Python is slow (use NumPy, use PyPy, etc.). Moreover, many popular materials simulation engines have Python bindings, which make fast (compiled C++/CUDA) code transparently accessible to the user.

```suggestion
Materials simulation engines for QM, periodic DFT, and classical MD are frequently written in languages other than Python, with compiled code that is tuned for parallel CPU or GPU hardware.
Some of these simulation codes have Python bindings that combine the engine's high performance with Python's ease of use.
Meanwhile, packages such as SciPy and NumPy provide sophisticated numerical function optimization and fitting capabilities.
Below, we describe examples of how the Schrödinger suite can be used to combine materials simulations with popular optimization routines in the SciPy ecosystem.
```

Author: Great, thanks, it is now:

Materials simulation engines for QM, periodic DFT, and classical MD (backends) are frequently written in compiled languages with enabled parallelization for CPU or GPU hardware.
These backends are called from Python workflows using job queuing system described above.
Meanwhile, packages such as SciPy and NumPy provide sophisticated numerical function optimization and fitting capabilities.
Below, we describe examples of how the Schrödinger suite can be used to combine materials simulations with popular optimization routines in the SciPy ecosystem.

Recently we implemented convex analysis of the stress strain curve (as described here [Patrone]_).

> Technically, it is a constrained minimization with boundary conditions (as implemented in ``scipy.optimize.minimize``) of a function related to the stress strain curve.

Reviewer 2: Starting this sentence with "Technically," may sound a bit rude (as if you're correcting someone else), and is not necessary for the flow of the sentence. I recommend removing it:
```suggestion
The package ``scipy.optimize.minimize`` is used for a constrained minimization with boundary conditions of a function related to the stress strain curve.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

> The stress strain curve is obtained from a series of consequent MD simulations on deformed cells (cell deformations are defined by strain type and deformation step).

Reviewer 2: I think the word "consequent" is unnecessary here unless it has a technical meaning that I don't know. It's already described as "a series of..."
```suggestion
The stress strain curve is obtained from a series of MD simulations on deformed cells (cell deformations are defined by strain type and deformation step).
```

Author: Fixed.

The pressure tensor of a deformed cell is related to stress.
This analysis allowed us to predict elongation at yield for high density polyethylene polymer and compare it with experimental data [Convex]_.

> Another area where scipy.optimize is used is fitting of the bulk energies at different cell volumes (compressed and expanded) in order to obtain bulk modulus and equation of state (EOS) of a material.

Reviewer 2: Try to use code font for package names like `scipy.optimize`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``scipy.optimize`` package is used for a least-squares fit of the bulk energies at different cell volumes (compressed and expanded) in order to obtain the bulk modulus and equation of state (EOS) of a material.
```

Author: > Try to use code font for package names like scipy.optimize.

Yes, thanks.

> Technically, it is a least squares method.

Reviewer 2: This sentence disrupts the flow of the preceding and following sentences. Maybe combine with the previous sentence? See comment above.
```suggestion
```

Author: Yes, removed.

> In the Schrödinger suite this was implemented as a part of the EOS workflow, fitting is performed on the the results obtained from a series of QE calculations performed on the original and compressed/expanded (deformed) cells.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Schrödinger suite this was implemented as a part of the EOS workflow, fitting is performed on the results obtained from a series of QE calculations performed on the original and compressed/expanded (deformed) cells.
```

Author: Fixed.

> This is also an example of the loosely coupled (embarrassingly parallel) jobs.

Reviewer 2: This section of the paper feels like an overview of many computational materials science workflows with its general statements about high-throughput / embarrassingly parallel workflows. I was hoping for more detailed content -- are there more details that can be extracted from the cited papers to make this section more interesting for a scientific computing audience? (I haven't had the chance to read those cited papers yet, but I am guessing they are focused towards a scientific / materials community, rather than a scientific computing community. There may be room to expand here with novel information not contained in the cited papers.)

In my first read through the paper, I started to wonder at this point about how the key phrases in the title of the paper would be addressed, since this is about 2/3 of the way through the paper's contents. Specifically, I was hoping to hear more about a few topics:
- **"utilizing SciPy"** -- The examples thus far have used least squares function minimization. It would be nice to have broader examples with more details about why those use cases are interesting/complex from an algorithmic _or_ scientific perspective.
- "other open source packages" -- only SciPy has been mentioned at this point, I think? Some open source simulation engines may have been mentioned but were not a focus. This is partially addressed when `lmfit` is mentioned below, but it would be nice to have more examples like that.
- "powerful API" -- there have been no descriptions of the Schrodinger suite's API design or what constitutes a "powerful" API
- "materials manipulation" -- this phrase has the best match for the content in the paper thus far, with descriptions of stress/strain, bulk modulus/EOS, and powder diffraction in this section

The paper is only 4 pages at present, so there's lots of room to zoom in on some of these topics with more interesting details. This section on "use cases" has a lot of potential and I believe it should be the highlight of the paper. Share more code snippets, figures, formulas, anything to add flavor to the scientific problem or computational approaches enabled by combining the SciPy ecosystem with this Schrodinger suite of simulation tools!

Reviewer 2: Additionally: have the authors contributed to the open source packages used for this work? That would be another great source of content to add, if upstream contributions (or even proposed improvements) have been made.

Author: > "utilizing SciPy" -- The examples thus far have used least squares function minimization. It would be nice to have broader examples with more details about why those use cases are interesting/complex from an algorithmic or scientific perspective.

Extended with figures and description of the stress strain wokflow.

> "other open source packages" -- only SciPy has been mentioned at this point, I think? Some open source simulation engines may have been mentioned but were not a focus. This is partially addressed when lmfit is mentioned below, but it would be nice to have more examples like that.

Packages mentioned with some description: enumlib, scikit learn (AL part), Openbabel (disorder part)

> "powerful API" -- there have been no descriptions of the Schrodinger suite's API design or what constitutes a "powerful" API

Provided examples if similar API from pymatgen. Unfortunately I can't share Schrodinger API explicitly.

Calculations of the deformed cells only depend on the bulk calculation and do not depend on each other and thus all the deformation jobs can be submitted in parallel, this greatly facilitates high-throughput runs.

One of the more complex examples of optimization is fitting of the experimental powder diffraction intensity peaks to the indexed peaks (Pawley refinement) [Jansen]_.
Here we employed the lmfit package [Lmfit]_ to perform a minimization of the multivariable Voigt-like function that represents the entire diffraction spectrum.
This allows to refine (optimize) unit cell parameters coming from the indexing data as a result goodness of fit (R-factor) between experimental and simulated spectrum is reported.

> Powder diffraction is widely used in drug discovery to assess purity of the material and discover known or unknown crystal polymorphs that could form [Powder]_.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is awkward at the end of the paragraph. I think it would be sensible to define powder diffraction at the beginning of this paragraph.

Author: Re-arranged:

Experimental structure refinement from powder diffraction is another example where more complex optimization is used.
Powder diffraction is a widely used method in drug discovery to assess purity of the material and discover known or unknown crystal polymorphs that could form [Powder]_.

In particular, fitting of the experimental powder diffraction intensity peaks to the indexed peaks (Pawley refinement) [Jansen]_.

Machine learning techniques
---------------------------

There is great interest in machine learning assisted materials discovery.
There are several components required to perform machine learning assisted materials discovery.

> In order to train a model, benchmark data from calculations and/or experimental data is required.

Reviewer: Here, does **calculations data** mean **simulation data**?

Author: Yes, replaced calculations with simulation.

Besides benchmark data, computation of the relevant descriptors is required (see below).
Finally, a model based on benchmark data and descriptors is generated that allows prediction of properties for novel materials.
There are several techniques to generate the model, spawning from linear or non-linear fitting to neural networks, DeepChem [Deepchem]_ and AutoQSAR [AutoQSAR]_.

> In the Schrödinger suite, benchmark data for small molecules and finite systems can be obtained using QM DFT molecular Jaguar code, for periodic systems, QE used, for larger polymeric and similar systems molecular dynamics Desmond code is used.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is awkward and long. Try rephrasing. Suggestion:
```suggestion
In the Schrödinger suite, benchmark data can be obtained using a few different tools.
The QM DFT molecular Jaguar code is used for small molecules and finite systems.
Periodic systems are simulated with Quantum ESPRESSO.
Lastly, larger polymeric and similar systems use the Desmond molecular dynamics code.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

For crystalline periodic systems, we have implemented several sets of descriptors.

> Element descriptors (such as atomic weight, number of valence electrons in s-, p- and d-shells, electronegativity), structure descriptors (such as density, volume per atom, and packing fraction descriptors) as implemented in matminer [Matminer]_, intercalation descriptors (such as cation and anion counts, crystal packing fraction, average neighbor ionicity) [Sendek]_, 3D-based smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) descriptors, as implemented in DScribe [DScribe]_.

Reviewer 2: I believe it's common practice to italicize the letters _s_, _p_, _d_, _f_ when referring to orbitals.

Reviewer 2: This isn't a complete sentence. It could be a bulleted list, or it could be transformed into a sentence like:
```suggestion
These descriptors include elemental features such as atomic weight, number of valence electrons in s-, p- and d-shells, or electronegativity; structural features such as density, volume per atom, and packing fraction descriptors from matminer [Matminer]_; intercalation descriptors such as cation and anion counts, crystal packing fraction, average neighbor ionicity [Sendek]_; and three-dimensional smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) descriptors implemented in DScribe [DScribe]_.
```

Author: Went with bulleted list.

Author: > I believe it's common practice to italicize the letters s, p, d, f when referring to orbitals.

Fixed.

> Using these descriptors and kernel regression methods to train the model, as implemented in scikit-learn [SkLearn]_, we were able to train a model that successfully predicted bulk modulus of a set of Li-containing battery related compounds.

Reviewer 2: Tons of questions here -- the reader would benefit from knowing a lot more.
- Is this describing a paper that should be cited?
- Why kernel ridge regression?
- Were all the features necessary? Are some features irrelevant?
- What does it mean to have a successful prediction of the bulk modulus? How was the quality of the result assessed?
- Were other methods used for comparison?
- What role does the Schrödinger software suite play in this example, if any? (It sounds like these features all come from tools like rdkit / matminer / DScribe and the analysis is done with scikit-learn.)

Author: I rushed a bit, I'm referring to an unfinished paper in this section. All valid questions. Replaced with:

We are currently training models that use these descriptors to predict properties, such as bulk modulus, of a set of Li-containing battery related compounds [Chandrasekaran]_.
Several methods to generate model will be compared, such as kernel regression methods (as implemented in the open source scikit-learn code [SkLearn]_) and AutoQSAR.

For isolated small molecules and extended non-periodic systems, rdkit can be used to generate a large number of atomic and molecular descriptors.
A lot of effort has been devoted to ensure that rdkit works on a wide variety of materials that are supported by Schrödinger suite.
As at the time of writing, the 4th most active contributor to rdkit is Ricardo Rodriguez-Schmidt from Schrödinger [RdkitC]_.

> Recently, we implemented a workflow that employs active learning (AL) for intelligent and iterative identification of promising materials candidates within a large dataset [Abroshan]_.

Reviewer 2: "promising materials candidates" -- what kind of properties being considered? It says "multiple properties" below but only lists "hole transport layer." Not all properties are equally easy to predict with machine learning.

Author: Re-wrote this section. Properties that were evaluated are:

MPO score was computed based on two properties: hole reorganization energy and oxidation potential of the material.

> In this approach, machine learning and DFT are combined.

Reviewer 2: Should this section cite research papers or review articles in the field of ML + DFT for property prediction? I have a few references I would suggest, but they may be 3 years old and may not reflect the current state of the field.

Author: Added:

.. [Vasudevan] R. Vasudevan, et al., *Machine learning for materials design and discovery.*, Journal of Applied Physics 129(7): 070401 (2021).

.. [Schleder] G. R. Schleder, et al., *From DFT to machine learning: recent approaches to materials science–a review*, Journal of Physics: Materials 2(3): 032001 (2019).

Let me know if any other good ones. Resolving for now.

In the framework of AL, the predicted value with associated uncertainty is considered to decide what materials to be added in each iteration, aiming to improve the model's performance in the next iteration (Figure :ref:`figal`).

> There we used descriptors as implemented in rdkit to featurize the chemical structures.

Reviewer 2: I suggest writing the name as RDKit, in line with the package's documentation rather than its import name. Additionally, this sentence is a little redundant ("used descriptors ... to featurize").
```suggestion
We used RDKit to compute descriptors for the chemical structures.
```

Author: Fixed and using RDKit everywhere.

> These descriptors generated on the initial subset of structures are given as vectors to an algorithm based on Random Forest as implemented in scikit-learn.

Reviewer 2: Was this a random forest classifier or a random forest regressor? Give more details about the model and optimization strategies. Consider a code snippet or figure that demonstrates the results.

Author: > Was this a random forest classifier or a random forest regressor?

Good point, it was Random Forest Regressor, mentioned in the paper added a ref with the direct link to SK RFR docs.

> Give more details about the model and optimization strategies. Consider a code snippet or figure that demonstrates the results.

Added a figure with explanations:

Figure :ref:`figalplot` (A) displays MPO scores for the HTL dataset estimated by AL as a function of hole reorganization energies that are separately calculated for all the materials.
This figure indicates that there are many materials in the dataset with desired low hole reorganization energies but are not suitable for HTL due to their improper oxidation potentials, suggesting that MPO is important to evaluate the optoelectronic performance of the materials.
Figure :ref:`figalplot` (B) presents MPO scores of the materials used in the training dataset of AL, demonstrating that the feedback loop in the AL workflow efficiently guides the data collection as the size of the training set increases.

> Bayesian optimization is employed to tune the hyperparameters of the model.

Reviewer 2: Verb tense and voice is inconsistent in many areas of the paper:
> There we used descriptors ...

(past tense, active voice)

> Bayesian optimization is employed ...

(present tense, passive voice)

This is a broad problem so I won't comment heavily on it, but I would recommend reading through the paper and editing for consistency throughout.

Author: Yes, someone with better English will hopefully join as a co-author, and fix these =)

Leaving unresolved for now.

Author: English was reviewed and fixed in many places.

In each iteration, a trained model is applied for making predictions on the remaining materials in the dataset.
Since it could be important to consider multiple properties in material discovery, multiple property optimization is also implemented [Kwak]_.

> Multiple properties are  scaled and combined into a single score value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple properties are scaled and combined into a single score value.
```

> In this particular study, for a dataset of ~9,000 molecules, the AL workflow determined the top candidates for hole (positively charged carrier) transport layer  by evaluating 550 molecules in 10 iterations using DFT calculations.

Reviewer 2: I'd put this sentence much higher in the paragraph. It explains the scope and purpose of the study.
```suggestion
In this particular study, for a dataset of ~9,000 molecules, the AL workflow determined the top candidates for hole (positively charged carrier) transport layer by evaluating 550 molecules in 10 iterations using DFT calculations.
```

Author: Fixed.

> Performing DFT calculations for all of the 9,000 molecules in the dataset would increase the computational cost by a factor of 15 versus the AL workflow.

Reviewer 2: Was the full dataset of 9000 molecules computed, to validate that the active learning algorithms didn't reject any samples that were in fact good candidates? More broadly, it would be helpful to discuss lessons learned from this experiment. What struggles were faced? From what you discovered (or from other research you cite), what classes of problems in materials engineering would you say are a good / bad fit for active learning?

Author: > Was the full dataset of 9000 molecules computed, to validate that the active learning algorithms didn't reject any samples that were in fact good candidates?

Confirmed with the authors that model was validated, added:

Resulting model was validated by randomly picking a molecule from the dataset, computing properties with DFT and comparing those to the predicted values.

>  More broadly, it would be helpful to discuss lessons learned from this experiment. What struggles were faced? From what you discovered (or from other research you cite), what classes of problems in materials engineering would you say are a good / bad fit for active learning?

We really have only one data point for now, added:

It seems that AL approach can be useful in the cases where problem space is broad (like chemical space), but there are many clusters of similar items (similar molecules).
In this case, benchmark data is only needed for few representatives of each cluster.
We are currently working on applying this approach to train models for predicting physical properties of soft materials (polymers).

> .. figure:: fig_al.jpg

Reviewer 2: This figure's text is too small to read without zooming the PDF. I would consider making it a full-width figure instead of only one column.

Can the figure resolution also be improved? It looks like the content is fuzzy even at full resolution.

Author: Figure is now much higher quality (300 DPI), in my tests it is zooming in nicely, resolving.

   :scale: 25%

   Active Learning workflow for the design and discovery of novel optoelectronics molecules. :label:`figal`

Conclusions
-----------

> We present several examples of how Schrödinger Materials Suite incorporates open source software packages.

Reviewer 2: I am unsure exactly what this sentence is intending to mean. Is "incorporates" the right word? Or is it more accurate to describe this as an integration with the SciPy ecosystem, through common data structures (e.g. NumPy arrays)?

More generally, I don't fully understand what the Schrödinger software does after reading this paper. It sounds like scientists are leveraging open source software as a part of their discovery/exploration of materials design spaces but I am having trouble identifying the boundary/interface where (proprietary?) Schrodinger software begins and open source software from the SciPy ecosystem ends. I was hoping to get more clarity on this while reading through the paper, but I didn't find what I was looking for.

After a bit of reading and internet searches beyond this paper, it seems that Jaguar and Desmond are proprietary commercial simulation codes developed by Schrodinger (or developed by DE Shaw Research? Unclear from a quick glance) and Quantum Espresso is an open source simulation engine ([GPLv2](https://www.quantum-espresso.org/Doc/pw_user_guide/node5.html)). I have a few questions that may help to provide clarity about the primary topics mentioned in this paper's title.

1. Do all the codes mentioned above have Python bindings?
2. Are those Python APIs provided by the "Schrödinger Materials Suite" in some unified manner, or are the Python bindings provided by each package (and thus probably feel different from one another)?
3. How similar or different are the Python APIs for the various workflows / use cases described in this paper? Code snippets or documentation references would be very helpful.
4. Do these codes use standard data structures like NumPy arrays to transfer information to other packages in the SciPy ecosystem, or do users need to save/load/parse files to share data between packages?
5. Do users of "Schrödinger Materials Suite" have access to open source code examples in the documentation or an examples repository that demonstrate interactions with the SciPy ecosystem? Are codes publicly available for replicating any of the studies described in this paper?
6. Is the API of the "Schrödinger Materials Suite" designed to align with common API paradigms of packages like NumPy/SciPy/scikit-learn? What does the API look and feel like? Is it functional? Object oriented? Client/server?
7. Where can users find basic information and documentation on the "Schrödinger Materials Suite"? There should be links to these resources in the text or footnotes of the first page of the paper.

Author: > I am unsure exactly what this sentence is intending to mean. Is "incorporates" the right word? Or is it more accurate to describe this as an integration with the SciPy ecosystem, through common data structures (e.g. NumPy arrays)?

Added a short description of the structure object to the Materials import and generation section:

From file, structure is read in a structure object through which atomic coordinates (as a NumPy array) and chemical information of the material can be accessed and updated.
Structure object is similar to the one implemented in open source packages such as pymatgen [pymatgen]_ and ASE [ase]_.
All the structure manipulations during the workflows are done using structure object interface.

> More generally, I don't fully understand what the Schrödinger software does after reading this paper. It sounds like scientists are leveraging open source software as a part of their discovery/exploration of materials design spaces but I am having trouble identifying the boundary/interface where (proprietary?) Schrodinger software begins and open source software from the SciPy ecosystem ends. I was hoping to get more clarity on this while reading through the paper, but I didn't find what I was looking for.

Introduction and workflows examples were expanded with figures and text.

> After a bit of reading and internet searches beyond this paper, it seems that Jaguar and Desmond are proprietary commercial simulation codes developed by Schrodinger (or developed by DE Shaw Research? Unclear from a quick glance) and Quantum Espresso is an open source simulation engine (GPLv2). I have a few questions that may help to provide clarity about the primary topics mentioned in this paper's title.

Yes, when introducing each package added if it is open source or proprietary and if it has python bindings.

> Do all the codes mentioned above have Python bindings?

Added if python bindings are present or not for each open source package.

> Are those Python APIs provided by the "Schrödinger Materials Suite" in some unified manner, or are the Python bindings provided by each package (and thus probably feel different from one another)?
> How similar or different are the Python APIs for the various workflows / use cases described in this paper? Code snippets or documentation references would be very helpful.

Expanded on general workflow flow:

As can be seen from above a workflow is usually some sort of structure modification through the structure object with a subsequent call to a backend code and analysis of its output (input for the next iteration depends on the output of the previous iteration is some workflows) after it successful (or not) exit.
Due to the large chemical and manipulation space of the materials, sometimes it very tricky to keep code for all workflows follow the same code logic.

Also provided a snippet for structure deformation using pymatgen (I can't provide snippet using Schrodinger API):

An example of deformation applied to a structure in pymatgen:

.. code-block:: python

   deform = Deformation([[1.0, 0.02, 0.02], [0.0, 1.0, 0.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.0]])
   lattice = Lattice([
      [3.8401979337, 0.00, 0.00],
      [1.9200989668, 3.3257101909, 0.00],
      [0.00, -2.2171384943, 3.1355090603],
   ])
   structure = Structure(lattice, ["Si", "Si"], [[0, 0, 0], [0.75, 0.5, 0.75]])

   strained_structure = deform.apply_to_structure(structure)

> Do these codes use standard data structures like NumPy arrays to transfer information to other packages in the SciPy ecosystem, or do users need to save/load/parse files to share data between packages?

Added description of the structure object and pymatgen structure snippet.

> Do users of "Schrödinger Materials Suite" have access to open source code examples in the documentation or an examples repository that demonstrate interactions with the SciPy ecosystem?

There is internal documentation that is only available for exisiting customers. Not sure if it is worth mentioning in the paper.

> Are codes publicly available for replicating any of the studies described in this paper?

No, but we publish algorithms that were used/implemented, added:

For every workflow and/or functionality, some sort of peer reviewed material (publication, conference presentation) is created where implemented algorithms are described to facilitate reproducibility.

> Is the API of the "Schrödinger Materials Suite" designed to align with common API paradigms of packages like NumPy/SciPy/scikit-learn? What does the API look and feel like? Is it functional? Object oriented? Client/server?

A little bit of this is in the structure object description (see above). Also added a code snippet for pymatgen structure object.

> Where can users find basic information and documentation on the "Schrödinger Materials Suite"? There should be links to these resources in the text or footnotes of the first page of the paper.

Added link to the website to ref 1.

Resolving this for now.

There is a wide range of applications in materials science that can benefit from already existing open source.
Where possible, we report issues to the package authors and submit improvements and bug fixes in the form of the pull requests.
We are thankful to all who have contributed to open source libraries, and have made it possible for us to develop a platform for accelerating innovation in materials and drug discovery.
We will continue contributing to these projects and we hope to further give back to the scientific community by facilitating research in both academia and industry.

> We hope that this report will inspire other scientific companies to give back to the open source community in order to improve the computational materials field and make science more reproducible.

Reviewer 2: These last sentences are very nice. I also hope that all researchers (academic or industry) in this field continue contributing to shared open source efforts to accelerate scientific discovery and reproducibility! ❤️

Author: We are trying to do our part and actually increase the amount of open source contributions. See for example: https://www.schrodinger.com/user-announcement/schrodinger-extends-materials-science-capabilities-through-integration-quantum

> References

Reviewer 2: I strongly recommend using a BibTeX file and citing references that way. See example here: https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/tree/2022/papers/00_bibderwalt

The formatting of the bibliography is a little strange, and I think it's because this isn't using BibTeX for citations. Compare formatting:

Another draft paper submitted to the proceedings using BibTeX:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3943761/172303728-4096fed0-35e6-4bfe-af2b-c5fc8d41d7d0.png)

This paper (notice how the number of initials-with-periods in the author's name determines the horizontal offset!?):
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3943761/172303835-1570bdc2-306c-4464-b44a-7243cbc544d9.png)

Author: Switched to bibtex.

The Schrödinger Materials Suite [Schr]_ uses a wide variety of scientific packages both in the calculation stage and visualization of results.

A common materials discovery practice is to start with reading an experimental structure of a material, compute its properties of interest (e.g. elastic constants, electrical conductivity), tune the material by modifying its structure (e.g. doping) or adding and removing atoms (deposition, evaporation), and then recompute the properties of the modified material.
This cycle can be run in a high-throughput manner, enumerating different structure modifications in a systematic fashion, such as doping ratio in a semiconductor or depositing different adsorbates.
Every step of this workflow can benefit from open source code.

Materials import and generation
-------------------------------

For reading and writing of material structures, several open source packages (e.g. OpenBabel [Obabel]_, RDKit [RDKit]_) have implemented functionality for working with several extensively used formats (e.g. CIF, PDB, mol, xyz).

> Experimental periodic structures of materials, mainly coming from single crystal X-ray diffraction, are distributed in CIF (Crystallographic Information File), PDB (Protein Data Bank) and lately mmCIF formats [Formats]_.

Reviewer: @afonari This is just a question, but not a request for change.  Why do you use `Experimental periodic structure` here?  In my field, people usually do not use `experimental`.

Author: I see, yes, experimental sounds like structure is experimental (not tested or something). Changed to:

Periodic structures of materials, mainly coming from single crystal X-ray/neutron diffraction experiments, are distributed in CIF (Crystallographic Information File), PDB (Protein Data Bank) and lately mmCIF formats [Formats]_.

Author: Also updated this sentence:

Structure refinement from powder diffraction experiment is another example where more complex optimization is used.

-------------------------------------

Materials simulation engines for QM, periodic DFT, and classical MD (referred to herein as backends) are frequently written in compiled languages with enabled parallelization for CPU or GPU hardware.
These backends are called from Python workflows using the job queuing systems described above.
Meanwhile, packages such as SciPy and NumPy provide sophisticated numerical function optimization and fitting capabilities.
Here, we describe examples of how the Schrödinger suite can be used to combine materials simulations with popular optimization routines in the SciPy ecosystem.

Recently we implemented convex analysis of the stress strain curve (as described here [Patrone]_).
``scipy.optimize.minimize`` [ScipyOptimize]_ is used for a constrained minimization with boundary conditions of a function related to the stress strain curve.
The stress strain curve is obtained from a series of MD simulations on deformed cells (cell deformations are defined by strain type and deformation step).
The pressure tensor of a deformed cell is related to stress.
This analysis allowed prediction of elongation at yield for high density polyethylene polymer.

> Obtained calculated yield of 10% *vs.* experimental value within 9-18% range (Figure :ref:`fig_stress_strain`) [Convex]_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Obtained calculated yield of 10% *vs.* experimental value within 9-18% range (Figure :ref:`fig_stress_strain` ) [Convex]_.
```

Reviewer 3: rst can be pretty fussy about whitespace 😞

Author: Great, thanks!

   :figclass: w
   :scale: 40%

   Example of a workflow for computational materials discovery. :label:`fig1`

Software tools for computational materials discovery can be facilitated by utilizing existing libraries that cover the fundamental mathematics used in the calculations in an optimized fashion.
This use of existing libraries allows developers to devote more time to developing new features instead of re-inventing established methods.
As a result, such a complementary approach improves the performance of computational materials software and reduces overall maintenance.

The Schrödinger Materials Science Suite [Schr]_ is a proprietary computational chemistry/physics platform that streamlines materials discovery workflows into a single graphical user interface (Materials Science Maestro).
The interface is a single portal for structure building and enumeration, physics-based modeling and machine learning, visualization and analysis.
Tying together the various modules are a wide variety of scientific packages, some of which are proprietary to Schrödinger, Inc., some of which are open-source and many of which blend the two to optimize capabilities and efficiency.

> For example, the main simulation engine for molecular quantum mechanics is Jaguar [Jaguar]_ proprietary code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the main simulation engine for molecular quantum mechanics is the Jaguar [Jaguar]_ proprietary code.
```

Author: Fixed.

> Proprietary classical molecular dynamics code Desmond (distributed by Schrödinger, Inc.) [Desmond]_ is used to obtain physical properties of soft materials, surfaces and polymers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The proprietary classical molecular dynamics code Desmond (distributed by Schrödinger, Inc.) [Desmond]_ is used to obtain physical properties of soft materials, surfaces and polymers.
```

> For periodic quantum mechanics, the main simulation engine is Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) [QE]_ open source code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For periodic quantum mechanics, the main simulation engine is the open source code Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) [QE]_.
```

> One of the co-authors of this proceedings (A. Fonari) contributes to the QE code in order to make integration with the Materials suite more seamless and less error-prone.

Reviewer 2: If "Materials Suite" is the proper name of the software, capitalize both words.
```suggestion
One of the co-authors of this proceedings (A. Fonari) contributes to the QE code in order to make integration with the Materials Science Suite more seamless and less error-prone.
```

> Also there is a push to use portable ``XML`` format as the input/output format for QE, this has been implemented in the Python open source qeschema code [qeschema]_.

Reviewer 2: This might be clearer:
```suggestion
As part of this integration, support for using the portable ``XML`` format for input and output in QE has been implemented in the open source Python package qeschema [qeschema]_.
```

Figure :ref:`fig2` gives an overview of some of the various products that compose the Schrödinger Materials Science Suite.

> The various workflows are implemented mainly in Python (some of them described below), calling on proprietary or open-source code where appropriate, again, to improve the performance of the software and reduce overall maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The various workflows are implemented mainly in Python (some of them described below), calling on proprietary or open-source code where appropriate to improve the performance of the software and reduce overall maintenance.
```

The materials discovery cycle can be run in a high-throughput manner, enumerating different structure modifications in a systematic fashion, such as doping ratio in a semiconductor or depositing different adsorbates.
As we will detail herein, there are several open source packages that allow the user to generate a large number of structures, run calculations in high throughput manner and analyze the results.

> For example, pymatgen open source package [pymatgen]_ facilitates generation and analysis of periodic structures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the open source package pymatgen [pymatgen]_ facilitates generation and analysis of periodic structures.
```

> It can generate inputs and read outputs of several packages, such as QE and also commercial VASP and Gaussian codes, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can generate inputs for and read outputs of QE, the commercial codes VASP and Gaussian, and several other formats.
```

To run and manage workflow jobs in a high-throughput manner, open source packages such as Custodian [pymatgen]_ and AiiDA [AiiDA]_ can be used.

.. figure:: fig_product.png
   :align: center
   :figclass: w
   :scale: 70%

   Some example products that compose the Schrödinger Materials Science Suite. :label:`fig2`

Materials import and generation
-------------------------------

For reading and writing of material structures, several open source packages (*e.g.* OpenBabel [Obabel]_, RDKit [RDKit]_) have implemented functionality for working with several commonly used formats (e.g. CIF, PDB, mol, xyz).
Experimental periodic structures of materials, mainly determined by single crystal X-ray diffraction, are distributed in CIF (Crystallographic Information File), PDB (Protein Data Bank) and lately, mmCIF formats [Formats]_.

> Correctly reading experimental structures is of significant importance, since the rest of the materials discovery workflow depends on it.

Reviewer: Since you used `Experimental periodic structures ` above, maybe it is better to still use `experimental periodic structure` or `periodic structure` here.  At least in the neutron diffraction experiments, people rarely use `experimental structure`.

In addition to atom coordinates and periodic cell information, structural data also contains symmetry operations (listed explicitly or by the means of providing a space group) that can be used to decrease the number of computations required for a particular system by accounting for symmetry.
This can be important, especially when scaling high-throughput calculations.
From file, structure is read in a structure object through which atomic coordinates (as a NumPy array) and chemical information of the material can be accessed and updated.
Structure object is similar to the one implemented in open source packages such as pymatgen [pymatgen]_ and ASE [ASE]_.

> All the structure manipulations during the workflows are done using structure object interface.

Reviewer: It is better to add a `by` between `done` and `using`. 

All the structure manipulations during the workflows are done `by` using structure object interface.

Reviewer: Do you mean that the manipulation are done by using the structure object interface to some specific crystal library?

Author: Fixed grammar.

> Do you mean that the manipulation are done by using the structure object interface to some specific crystal library?

I meant structure modification, by for example strain, updated sentence to:

All the structure manipulations during the workflows are done by using structure object interface (see structure deformation example below).

Example of Structure object definition in pymatgen:

.. code-block:: python

   class Structure:

      def __init__(self, lattice, species, coords, ...):
          """
          Create a periodic structure.
          ...

>           """

Reviewer 2: I would condense this for simplicity.
```suggestion
          """Create a periodic structure."""
```

> One consideration of note is that PBD, CIF and mmCIF structure formats allow description of the positional disorder (for example, a solvent molecule without a stable position within the cell which can be described by multiple sets of coordinates).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One consideration of note is that PDB, CIF and mmCIF structure formats allow description of the positional disorder (for example, a solvent molecule without a stable position within the cell which can be described by multiple sets of coordinates).
```

Author: Nice one, thanks, fixed.

> Another complication is that experimental data spans an interval of almost a century, one of the oldest crystal structures deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) [CSD]_, dates to 1924 [Grph]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another complication is that experimental data spans an interval of almost a century: one of the oldest crystal structures deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) [CSD]_ dates to 1924 [Grph]_.
```

These nuances  and others present nontrivial technical challenges for developers.
Thus, it has been a continuous effort by Schrödinger, Inc. (at least 39 commits and several weeks of work went into this project) and others to correctly read and convert periodic structures in OpenBabel.

> By version 3.1.1 (the most recent at writing time), there are no known structures read incorrectly by OpenBabel that the authors are aware of.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By version 3.1.1 (the most recent at writing time), the authors are not aware of any structures read incorrectly by OpenBabel.
```

> In general, non-periodic molecular formats are simpler to handle because they only contain atom coordinates and no cell or symmetry information.

Reviewer: You may replace `and no cell ..` with `but no cell ...`.

OpenBabel has Python bindings but due to the GPL license limitation, it is called as a subprocess from the Schrödinger suite.

Another important consideration in structure generation is modeling of substitutional disorder in solid alloys and materials with point defects (intermetallics, semiconductors, oxides and their crystalline surfaces).
In such cases, the unit cell and atomic sites of the crystal or surface slab are well defined while the chemical species occupying the site may vary.
In order to simulate substitutional disorder, one must generate the ensemble of structures that includes all statistically significant atomic distributions in a given unit cell.
This can be achieved by a brute force enumeration of all symmetrically unique atomic structures with a given number of vacancies, impurities or solute atoms.

> Open source enumlib library [Enumlib]_ implements algorithms for such a systematic enumeration of periodic structures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The open source library enumlib [Enumlib]_ implements algorithms for such a systematic enumeration of periodic structures.
```

> enumlib consists of several Fortran binaries and Python scripts that can be run as a subprocess (no Python bindings).

Reviewer 2: I usually try to respect package authors' preference of capitalization while also avoiding starting sentences with lowercased words. This helps solve both problems:
```suggestion
The enumlib package consists of several Fortran binaries and Python scripts that can be run as a subprocess (no Python bindings).
```

> This allows the user to generate a large set of symmetrically nonequivalent materials with different compositions (e.g. doping or defect concentration).

Reviewer 2: There's some inconsistency in the paper about whether _e.g._ is italicized or not. Please choose one way and make it consistent. (Same for i.e. and other Latin abbreviations, as appropriate.)

Author: Removed italic everywhere.

Recently, we applied this approach in simultaneous study of the activity and stability of Pt based core-shell type catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction [TM]_.
We generated a set of stable doped Pt/transition metal/nitrogen surfaces using periodic enumeration.
Using QE to perform periodic density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we assessed surface phase diagrams for Pt alloys and identified the avenues for stabilizing the cost effective core-shell systems by a judicious choice of the catalyst core material.

> Such catalysts may prove critical in electrocatalysis for fuel cell applications.

Reviewer: Do you have any paper reporting catalyst with fuel cell?  It will make your statement stronger.

Author: Unfortunately, no.

Workflow capabilities
---------------------

In the last section, we briefly described a complete workflow from structure generation and enumeration to periodic DFT calculations to analysis.
In order to be able to run a massively parallel screening of materials, a highly scalable and stable queuing system (job scheduler) is required.
We have implemented a job queuing system on top of the most used queuing systems (LSF, PBS, SGE, SLURM, TORQUE, UGE) and exposed a Python API to submit and monitor jobs.
In line with technological advancements, cloud is also supported by means of a virtual cluster configured with SLURM.
This allows the user to submit a large number of jobs, limited only by SLURM scheduling capabilities and cloud resources.
In order to accommodate job dependencies in workflows, for each job, a parent job (or multiple parent jobs) can be defined forming a directed graph of jobs (Figure :ref:`fig3`).

.. figure:: fig_job_scheme.png
   :scale: 30%

   Example of the job submission process. :label:`fig3`

> There could be several reasons for a job to fail and there are several restart and recovery mechanisms in place.

Reviewer: It may be better to separate it into two sentences.   One is the cause/situation.  The other is the solution.

Author: Sure, replaced with:

There could be several reasons for a job to fail. Depending on the reason of failure, there are several restart and recovery mechanisms in place.

The lowest level is the restart mechanism (in SLURM it is called *requeue*) which is performed by the queuing system itself.
This is triggered when a node goes down.
On the cloud, preemptible instances (nodes) can go offline at any moment.
In addition, workflows implemented in the proprietary Schrödinger Materials Science Suite have built-in methods for handling various types of failure.

> For example, in case when the simulation is not converging to a requested energy accuracy, it is wasteful to blindly restart the calculation without changing some input parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the simulation is not converging to a requested energy accuracy, it is wasteful to blindly restart the calculation without changing some input parameters.
```

> However, in the case of full disk space failure, it is reasonable to try restart with hopes to get a node with more empty disk space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, in the case of a failure due to full disk space, it is reasonable to try restart with hopes to get a node with more empty disk space.
```

> If a job fails (and can not be restarted), all its children (if any) will not start, thus saving queuing and computational time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a job fails (and cannot be restarted), all its children (if any) will not start, thus saving queuing and computational time.
```

For soft materials (polymers, organic small molecules and substrates composed of soft molecules), convex hull and related mathematical methods are important for finding possible accessible solvent voids (during submerging or sorption) and adsorbate sites (during molecular deposition).
These methods are conveniently implemented in the open source SciPy package [Scipy]_.
Thus, we implemented molecular deposition and evaporation workflows by using the Desmond MD engine as the backend in tandem with the convex hull functionality.
This workflow enables simulation of the deposition and evaporation of the small molecules on a substrate.
We utilized the aforementioned deposition workflow in the study of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which are fabricated using a stepwise process, where new layers are deposited on top of previous layers.
Both vacuum and solution deposition processes have been used to prepare these films, primarily as amorphous thin film active layers lacking long-range order.
Each of these deposition techniques introduces changes to the film structure and consequently, different charge-transfer and luminescent properties [Deposition]_.

> As can be seen from above a workflow is usually some sort of structure modification through the structure object with a subsequent call to a backend code and analysis of its output (input for the next iteration depends on the output of the previous iteration is some workflows) after it successful (or not) exit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As can be seen from above, a workflow is usually some sort of structure modification through the structure object with a subsequent call to a backend code and analysis of its output if it succeeds.
Input for the next iteration depends on the output of the previous iteration in some workflows.
```

> Due to the large chemical and manipulation space of the materials, sometimes it very tricky to keep code for all workflows follow the same code logic.

Reviewer 2: I tried to improve the wording in this sentence, but I had difficulty determining the purpose of this sentence. It feels somewhat obvious that different workflows will have different code logic, but maybe there's a more interesting discussion about what _can_ be shared and the ways that this software helps unify disparate workflows.
```suggestion
Due to the large chemical and manipulation space of the materials, sometimes it is difficult to use the same program logic for all workflows.
```

Author: Updated the sentence, thanks. I see what you are suggesting, will think about this, resolving for now.

> For every workflow and/or functionality, some sort of peer reviewed material (publication, conference presentation) is created where implemented algorithms are described to facilitate reproducibility.

Reviewer 2: Clarify what set of functionality you're describing. All of the Materials Science Suite?
```suggestion
For every workflow and/or functionality in the Materials Science Suite, some sort of peer reviewed material (publication, conference presentation) is created where implemented algorithms are described to facilitate reproducibility.
```

Author: Yes, thanks.

These backends are called from Python workflows using the job queuing systems described above.
Meanwhile, packages such as SciPy and NumPy provide sophisticated numerical function optimization and fitting capabilities.
Here, we describe examples of how the Schrödinger suite can be used to combine materials simulations with popular optimization routines in the SciPy ecosystem.

Recently we implemented convex analysis of the stress strain curve (as described here [Patrone]_).
``scipy.optimize.minimize`` [ScipyOptimize]_ is used for a constrained minimization with boundary conditions of a function related to the stress strain curve.
The stress strain curve is obtained from a series of MD simulations on deformed cells (cell deformations are defined by strain type and deformation step).
The pressure tensor of a deformed cell is related to stress.
This analysis allowed prediction of elongation at yield for high density polyethylene polymer.
Figure :ref:`fig4` shows obtained calculated yield of 10% *vs.* experimental value within 9-18% range [Convex]_.

.. figure:: fig_stress_strain.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 70%
   :figclass: w

>    Left: The uniaxial stress/strain curve of a polymer calculated using Desmond through the stress strain workflow, grey band indicates inflection point (yield)). Right: Constant strain simulation with convex analysis indicates elongation at yield. Red curve - simulated stress versus strain. Blue curve - convex analysis. :label:`fig4`

Reviewer 2: Improved wording in caption. Would it be possible to remove the gray background from the first image, and remove the green background from the second image? The backgrounds are somewhat visually distracting and don't appear to mean anything.
```suggestion
   Left: The uniaxial stress/strain curve of a polymer calculated using Desmond through the stress strain workflow. The dark grey band indicates an inflection that marks the yield point. Right: Constant strain simulation with convex analysis indicates elongation at yield. The red curve shows simulated stress versus strain. The blue curve shows convex analysis. :label:`fig4`
```

Reviewer 2: The right figure says "Main axis: Axis c" at the top but I don't know what that means. The fonts are also a little small on the right figure.

Author: Updated the figure, updated the label, thanks.

The ``scipy.optimize`` package is used for a least-squares fit of the bulk energies at different cell volumes (compressed and expanded) in order to obtain the bulk modulus and equation of state (EOS) of a material.
In the Schrödinger suite this was implemented as a part of an EOS workflow, in which fitting is performed on the results obtained from a series of QE calculations performed on the original as well as compressed and expanded (deformed) cells.
An example of deformation applied to a structure in pymatgen:

.. code-block:: python

>    deform = Deformation([

Reviewer 2: At the top, could you show the imports being used? Something like:
```python
from pymatgen.analysis.elasticity.strain import Deformation
from pymatgen.core.lattice import Lattice
from pymatgen.core.structure import Structure
```

Author: Sure, fixed.

      [1.0, 0.02, 0.02],
      [0.0, 1.0, 0.0],
      [0.0, 0.0, 1.0]])

> 

Reviewer 2: I would remove this blank line for consistency - there are no blank lines later in the snippet.
```suggestion
```

Author: Added spaces between all the calls.

   latt = Lattice([
      [3.84, 0.00, 0.00],
      [1.92, 3.326, 0.00],
      [0.00, -2.22, 3.14],
   ])
   st = Structure(
      latt,
      ["Si", "Si"],
      [[0, 0, 0], [0.75, 0.5, 0.75]])

   strained_st = deform.apply_to_structure(st)

This is also an example of loosely coupled (embarrassingly parallel) jobs.
In particular, calculations of the deformed cells only depend on the bulk calculation and do not depend on each other.

> Thus, all the deformation jobs can be submitted in parallel, greatly facilitating high-throughput runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, all the deformation jobs can be submitted in parallel, facilitating high-throughput runs.
```

Experimental structure refinement from powder diffraction is another example where more complex optimization is used.
Powder diffraction is a widely used method in drug discovery to assess purity of the material and discover known or unknown crystal polymorphs [Powder]_.
In particular, there is interest in fitting of the experimental powder diffraction intensity peaks to the indexed peaks (Pawley refinement) [Jansen]_.

> Here we employed the open source ``lmfit`` package [Lmfit]_ to perform a minimization of the multivariable Voigt-like function that represents the entire diffraction spectrum.

Reviewer 2: Some package names are in `code font` but not all. I would try to be consistent in how the names are written. It seems like most have not used code font, so I'd adjust this one to match (use plain font).

Author: Fixed, code fond are now only:
XML, requeue, scipy.optimize.minimize, scipy.optimize

> This allows the user to refine (optimize) unit cell parameters coming from the indexing data as a result goodness of fit (:math:`R`-factor) between experimental and simulated spectrum is reported.

Reviewer 2: Is this supposed to be two separate sentences?
```suggestion
This allows the user to refine (optimize) unit cell parameters coming from the indexing data.
Goodness of fit (:math:`R`-factor) between experimental and simulated spectrum is reported.
```

Author: Rewrote as:

This allows the user to refine (optimize) unit cell parameters coming from the indexing data and as the result, goodness of fit (:math:`R`-factor) between experimental and simulated spectrum is minimized.
===
The idea is that get better matching between indexed and experimental parameters. The better the matching the smaller is the R factor.

Machine learning techniques
---------------------------

Of late, there is great interest in machine learning assisted materials discovery.
There are several components required to perform machine learning assisted materials discovery.
In order to train a model, benchmark data from simulation and/or experimental data is required.
Besides benchmark data, computation of the relevant descriptors is required (see below).
Finally, a model based on benchmark data and descriptors is generated that allows prediction of properties for novel materials.

> There are several techniques to generate the model, spawning from linear or non-linear fitting to neural networks, open source DeepChem [DeepChem]_ and AutoQSAR [AutoQSAR]_ from the Schrödinger suite.

Reviewer 2: This sentence didn't quite make sense to me. I attempted to rewrite it.
```suggestion
There are several techniques to generate the model, such as linear or non-linear fitting to neural networks.
Tools include the open source DeepChem [DeepChem]_ and AutoQSAR [AutoQSAR]_ from the Schrödinger suite.
```

Author: Sure, looks better.

Depending on the type of materials, benchmark data can be obtained using different codes available in the Schrödinger suite:

> - small molecules and finite systems -  Jaguar

Reviewer 2: This list isn't rendering like you wanted. It may need an empty line above and below the list.
```suggestion

- small molecules and finite systems -  Jaguar
```

Author: Ah, thanks.

- periodic systems - Quantum ESPRESSO
- larger polymeric and similar systems - Desmond

Different materials systems require different descriptors for featurization.
For example, for crystalline periodic systems, we have implemented several sets of tailored descriptors.
Generation of these descriptors again uses a mix of open source and Schrödinger proprietary tools.
Specifically:

> - elemental features such as atomic weight, number of valence electrons in *s*, *p* and *d*-shells, electronegativity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- elemental features such as atomic weight, number of valence electrons in *s*, *p*, and *d*-shells, and electronegativity
```

- structural features such as density, volume per atom, and packing fraction descriptors implemented in the open source matminer package [Matminer]_

> - intercalation descriptors such as cation and anion counts, crystal packing fraction, average neighbor ionicity [Sendek]_ implemented in the Schrödinger suite

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- intercalation descriptors such as cation and anion counts, crystal packing fraction, and average neighbor ionicity [Sendek]_ implemented in the Schrödinger suite
```

- three-dimensional smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) descriptors implemented in the open source DScribe package [DScribe]_.

We are currently training models that use these descriptors to predict properties, such as bulk modulus, of a set of Li-containing battery related compounds [Chandrasekaran]_.

> Several methods to generate model will be compared, such as kernel regression methods (as implemented in the open source scikit-learn code [SkLearn]_) and AutoQSAR.

Reviewer 2: Is it a method to generate a model -- or just a model?
```suggestion
Several models will be compared, such as kernel regression methods (as implemented in the open source scikit-learn code [SkLearn]_) and AutoQSAR.
```

Author: "models" is correct, fixed.

These descriptors generated on the initial subset of structures are given as vectors to an algorithm based on Random Forest Regressor as implemented in scikit-learn [SKRFR]_.
Bayesian optimization is employed to tune the hyperparameters of the model.
In each iteration, a trained model is applied for making predictions on the remaining materials in the dataset.
Figure :ref:`figalplot` (A) displays MPO scores for the HTL dataset estimated by AL as a function of hole reorganization energies that are separately calculated for all the materials.
This figure indicates that there are many materials in the dataset with desired low hole reorganization energies but are not suitable for HTL due to their improper oxidation potentials, suggesting that MPO is important to evaluate the optoelectronic performance of the materials.
Figure :ref:`figalplot` (B) presents MPO scores of the materials used in the training dataset of AL, demonstrating that the feedback loop in the AL workflow efficiently guides the data collection as the size of the training set increases.

.. figure:: fig_al_plot.png
   :align: center
   :figclass: w
   :scale: 110%

>    A: MPO score of all materials in the HTL dataset. B: Those used in the training set as a function of the hole reorganization energy - :math:`\lambda_h`. :label:`figalplot`

Reviewer 2: The scatter plots are very dense with a lot of overlapping data points. I wonder if the marker size could be reduced, or if partially transparent points would help indicate regions of high density.

```suggestion
   A: MPO score of all materials in the HTL dataset. B: Those used in the training set as a function of the hole reorganization energy (:math:`\lambda_h`). :label:`figalplot`
```

Author: Fixed - lambda_h.

Author: > I wonder if the marker size could be reduced, or if partially transparent points would help indicate regions of high density.

Will ask the author, but lower probability, resolving for now.

In this case, benchmark data is only needed for few representatives of each cluster.
We are currently working on applying this approach to train models for predicting physical properties of soft materials (polymers).

Conclusions
-----------

We present several examples of how Schrödinger Materials Suite integrates open source software packages.
There is a wide range of applications in materials science that can benefit from already existing open source code.
Where possible, we report issues to the package authors and submit improvements and bug fixes in the form of the pull requests.
We are thankful to all who have contributed to open source libraries, and have made it possible for us to develop a platform for accelerating innovation in materials and drug discovery.
We will continue contributing to these projects and we hope to further give back to the scientific community by facilitating research in both academia and industry.
We hope that this report will inspire other scientific companies to give back to the open source community in order to improve the computational materials field and make science more reproducible.

References
----------

> .. [Schr] Schrödinger Release (2021). Schrödinger Release 2021-2: Materials Science Suite. New York, NY: Schrödinger, LLC. http://www.schrodinger.com/materials/

Reviewer 2: This link redirects. I would try to use the most current redirections, and use `https` for all URLs if supported by the website.
```suggestion
.. [Schr] Schrödinger Release (2021). Schrödinger Release 2021-2: Materials Science Suite. New York, NY: Schrödinger, LLC. https://www.schrodinger.com/platform/materials-science
```

.. [pymatgen] S. P. Ong, et al. *Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A Robust, Open-Source Python Library for Materials Analysis*, Computational Materials Science, 68: 314–319 (2013). https://pymatgen.org/
.. [AiiDA] S. P. Huber et al., *AiiDA 1.0, a scalable computational infrastructure for automated reproducible workflows and data provenance*, Scientific Data 7: 300 (2020). https://www.aiida.net/
.. [Obabel] N. M. O'Boyle, et al. *Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox*, Journal of cheminformatics 3.1 (2011): 1-14. https://openbabel.org/

> .. [RDKit] G. Landrum. *RDKit: A software suite for cheminformatics, computational chemistry, and predictive modeling*, (2013). http://www.rdkit.org/

Reviewer 2: Prefer `https` where supported.
```suggestion
.. [RDKit] G. Landrum. *RDKit: A software suite for cheminformatics, computational chemistry, and predictive modeling*, (2013). https://www.rdkit.org/
```

Author: Thanks, ensured no "http:" present.
